[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today
we're going to look at how letters arise in
algebra in the context of identities. We've
had already our share of identities when we
were talking about the foundations of arithmetic,
the basic laws satisfied by arithmetic with, say,
rational numbers. For example, we observe that
m plus n equals n plus m for any natural numbers
m and n. So this one single expression captures
at once a whole range of possible formulas valid
for particular numbers. Special cases of this
are, for example, 1 plus 2 equals 2 plus 1,
or 2 plus 5 equals 5 plus 2, or 13 plus 24
equals 24 plus 13, or trillions of other
examples you could come up with. All of
these are special cases of this one law.
We also framed some other laws: the commutative
law for multiplication, the distributive
law, the associative law for addition, and the
associative law for multiplication. In each case,
the m's, k's, and n's represent arbitrary numbers
of a particular kind. So an algebraic identity
encodes a law which is valid for generally
any values assigned to the variables. This
is a rule that's valid no matter which
natural numbers we substitute for m,
k, and n. That's an important
usage of letters in algebra.
Now there are many very rich identities in
mathematics, starting from relatively simple ones
to progressively more complicated ones to very
rich and sophisticated identities. Let's start off
by looking at some fundamental identities that are
important for almost all students of mathematics.
Next to the basic laws of arithmetic that we've
already talked about, I think the simple quadratic
identities are the next in line. We're talking
about what (a + b) squared is. So that's (a + b)
times (a + b), and all students learn that it's
a squared plus 2ab plus b squared. So this is an
identity that allows us to replace this with
this or conversely this with this whenever we
find it in an expression. A simple variant
is (a - b) squared. It's almost the same;
it's a squared minus 2ab plus b squared. And of
course, we can verify these identities by simply
using the distributive law to expand (a - b) times
(a - b), for example. Another important quadratic
identity is the difference of squares: (a + b)
times (a - b) equals a squared minus b squared.
Next in line, I suppose in terms
of simplicity and importance,
are the geometric series identities. The first
one is really just a special case of this one:
the fact that (1 + r) times (1 - r) equals 1 -
r squared. Now you might ask why am I switching
from a's and b's to r? Well, that's because
in traditional mathematics, certain kinds of
identities have certain variables associated with
them, and so I'm trying to use the notation that's
most commonly associated with the identities
that we're talking about. A variant on this,
slightly more complicated, is (1 + r + r squared)
times (1 - r). It's important to verify that when
you multiply this all out and collect terms, you
get 1 - r cubed because here you have 1 + r + r
squared and here you have -r - r squared
- r cubed. So the r squared terms cancel;
you're just left with 1 - r cubed. That kind of
telescoping or collapsing of intermediate terms
happens from larger expressions. If we take (1 +
r + r squared + r cubed) and multiply by (1 - r),
again the only thing that's left after you expand
and cancel is 1 - r to the fourth. Then there's
an obvious pattern that's established here, and
we can write the general law involving not just a
general letter r representing a number but also in
terms of a general exponent n, generalizing the 2,
3, 4, and so on that appeared here. So in this
context, the n represents a natural number,
1 in this sequence, while the r is potentially
a rational number. This very important
formula is the geometric series formula: 1 + r +
r squared all the way up to r to the n is 1 - r to
the n + 1 divided by 1 - r. It's what we get when
we take an expression like this and divide by the
1 - r. That would be the case when n is 3, and
because we're dividing by 1 - r, it's important
to remember that the formula is only valid if this
denominator is not 0, so we have to require that
r is not equal to 1. The geometric series formula
is often written like this, slightly more general,
where the first term is a instead of one, but each
term after that is obtained by multiplying by r.
So the sum a + ar all the way up to ar to the n
is a times 1 - r to the n + 1 divided by 1 - r.
Here are two special identities that play a
particularly important role in geometry. The
first one we could call the Pythagorean identity,
and here's the simple form: (1 - h squared) all
squared plus (2h) all squared equals (1 + h
squared) squared. I've decided to use h instead
of some other variable for a pretty good reason.
A generalization of this is m squared minus (n
squared all squared) plus (2mn) all squared equals
(m squared + n squared) all squared. All students
of mathematics should verify this formula by
explicitly expanding both sides and showing
that they are in fact the same. The connection
of this formula with Pythagorean triples is well
known. For any values of m and n, natural numbers,
we're getting three numbers here which have the
property that this squared plus this squared
equals this squared, giving us the sides of a
right triangle according to Pythagoras' theorem.
So for example, if m is 2 and n is 1, then these
three numbers inside the brackets become 3, 4,
and 5. 3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared.
You can generate other Pythagorean triples
simply by changing the values of m and n.
Here are two other important identities that
are almost the same: Fibonacci's identities.
This quantity squared plus this quantity squared
equals this times this, and a slight variant:
this same squared plus this thing squared
equals again the same product of things.
These two identities are crucial for
trigonometry and for complex numbers.
These are also important identities that all
students of maths should verify by expansion.
Next time we're going to talk about probably
the most common and useful of all identities:
the binomial theorem, which is
a centerpiece of high school
mathematics. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]